# Using a Novel Unbiased Dataset and Deep Learning Model to Predict Protein-Protein Interactions

Proteins are indispensable to the living organisms, forming the backbone of almost all the cellular processes. However, these macromolecules rarely act alone, integrating the Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI). It should come as no surprise that their deregulation is one of the main causes to several disease states. The sudden surge of interest in this field of study motivated the development of innovative in silico methods. Nonetheless the obvious advances in recent years, the effectiveness of these computational methods remains questionable. There still are not enough evidences that support the use of just in silico techniques to predict PPIs not yet experimentally determined. It is proved that one of the primary reasons leading to this situation is the non-existence of a "gold-standard" negative interactions dataset. Contrary to the high abundance of publicly available positive interactions, the negative examples are often artificially generated, culminating in biased samples. In this paper we propose a new unbiased technique to create negative examples, that does not overly constraint the negative interactions distribution. Beyond the novel dataset creation task we also established a Deep Learning (DL) model as a tool to predict whether two individual proteins are capable of interacting with each other, using exclusively the complete raw amino acid sequences. The obtained results firmly indicate that the proposed model is a valuable tool to predict PPIs, while also highlighting that there is still some room for improvement when implemented in unbiased datasets.

## **Datasets:** 

-**Independent dataset**: All the human multi-validated positive physical PPIs available in BioGRID were selected. The generation of negative interactions consists on identifying the unique proteins from the multi-validated positive interactions and put them in the set S of proteins. Afterwards, two distinct proteins were randomly sampled from S. Finally, the pair sampled was compared with the multi-validated and not multi-validated positive interactions and if it was not already labeled as one of them, then it was considered a new negative interaction

-**Pan et al. dataset**: It is a dataset exclusively composed byhuman PPIs, whose positive interactions were obtained from theHuman Protein References Database. The negative interactions were computationally generated by the non co-localization method, where two randomly paired proteins found on distinct sub-cellular compartments are considered as non-interacting, if that pair is not identified in the positive data. 

-**Du et al. dataset**: A Saccharomyces cerevisiae PPIs dataset was gathered from the Database of Interacting Proteins. The negative interactions generation process was similar to the previous dataset

## **Model overview:**
Our proposed model treats every protein as a separate entity, where rather than concatenating the proteins, each protein is separately fed to a stream of layers, so that each separate network is able to better assimilate the features of a single protein. We can clearly identify the separate networks derived from each protein. This first block of the whole model is responsible for extracting the high-level features of the complete protein sequence, considering that the stacking of convolutional layers hierarchically decompose the sequence, layer by layer, so that each consecutive layer learns to detect higher-level features, while at the same time preserving their spatial dependencies. At the end of the separate networks both proteins have been filtered and are represented by their relevant features. These two vectors are then merged into a vector, specific for each interaction, and posteriorly fed to the final block. In this final block different combinations of these features are tested and the model learns a function, that is capable to distinguish between interacting and non-interacting pairs, from the high-level features detected.

## **Requirements:**

### **Future work:** 
To improve the already obtained results, larger datasets can be incorporated in the creation of the DL models, allowing the model itself to learn from more samples and to better comprehend the distribution of those in the proteome. Also, with the progressive unveiling of more types of protein data, as their coverage of the whole proteome gradually increases, much more protein data can be combined in order to create more polished datasets.

